ARROW-15328: [C++][Docs] Streaming CSV reader missing from documentation (#14452)
apache/arrow: docs/source/cpp/csv.rst

=============================

Arrow provides a fast CSV reader allowing ingestion of external data
as Arrow Tables or streamed as Arrow RecordBatches.

.. seealso::
   :ref:`CSV reader/writer API reference <cpp-api-csv>`.

Reading CSV files
=================

Data in a CSV file can either be read in as a single Arrow Table using
:class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` or streamed as RecordBatches using
:class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader`. See :ref:`Tradeoffs <tradeoffs>` for a
discussion of the tradeoffs between the two methods.

TableReader
-----------

The :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` class requires an

> :class:`::arrow::io::InputStream` instance representing the input file.

Reviewer: Since this is true for both readers, why not move this up as a more general sentence in "Reading CSV files"?

For example:
```rest
Both these readers require an :class:`arrow::io::InputStream` instance
representing the input file. Their behavior can be customized using a
combination of :class:`~arrow::csv::ReadOptrions`,
:class:`~arrow::csv::ParseOptions`, and :class:`~arrow::csv::ConvertOptions`.
```

Author: This is a good improvement, thanks.

=============================

Arrow provides a fast CSV reader allowing ingestion of external data

> as Arrow Tables or streamed as Arrow RecordBatches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to create Arrow Tables or a stream of Arrow RecordBatches.
```

This sentence feels slightly grammatically off to me.  It sounds like the input data is tables or batches but really it's the output.

Author: Fair enough. Fixed in 381f8b29ba205f6e0040c632eb23cec8eb46764c.

.. seealso::
   :ref:`CSV reader/writer API reference <cpp-api-csv>`.

Reading CSV files
=================

Data in a CSV file can either be read in as a single Arrow Table using
:class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` or streamed as RecordBatches using
:class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader`. See :ref:`Tradeoffs <cpp-csv-tradeoffs>` for a
discussion of the tradeoffs between the two methods.

> Both these readers require an :class:`arrow::io::InputStream` instance

Reviewer 2: Not a problem at the moment.  However, there is [a PR](https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/14269) which would allow you to get slightly better performance if you use a random access file (typically if you're connected to cloud storage) instead of an input stream.  So we might need to update this text after that pull merges.

Author: Thanks for the heads up. I'll keep track of that PR.

:class:`::arrow::io::InputStream` instance representing the input file.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "arrow/csv/api.h"

   {
      // ...
      arrow::io::IOContext io_context = arrow::io::default_io_context();
      std::shared_ptr<arrow::io::InputStream> input = ...;

      auto read_options = arrow::csv::ReadOptions::Defaults();
      auto parse_options = arrow::csv::ParseOptions::Defaults();
      auto convert_options = arrow::csv::ConvertOptions::Defaults();

      // Instantiate StreamingReader from input stream and options
      auto maybe_reader =
        arrow::csv::StreamingReader::Make(io_context,
                                          input,
                                          read_options,
                                          parse_options,
                                          convert_options);
      if (!maybe_reader.ok()) {
        // Handle StreamingReader instantiation error...
      }
      std::shared_ptr<arrow::csv::StreamingReader> reader = *maybe_reader;

      // Set aside a RecordBatch pointer for re-use while streaming
      std::shared_ptr<RecordBatch> batch;

      // Attempt to read the first RecordBatch

>       reader->ReadNext(&batch);

Reviewer: Should not ignore the Status returned here.

Author: Good catch, changed to show an explicit block for handling status.

      if (batch == NULL) {
        // Handle end of file
      }
   }

Behavior of :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` can be customized using a
combination of :class:`~arrow::csv::ReadOptrions`,
:class:`~arrow::csv::ParseOptions`, and :class:`~arrow::csv::ConvertOptions`.

> .. _tradeoffs:

Reviewer: These references are global to the entire docs, so should be disambiguated, for example `cpp-csv-tradeoffs` instead of `tradeoffs`.

Author: Done.

Tradeoffs
---------

The choice between using :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` or :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader`
will depend on your use case but two caveats are worth pointing out:

1. :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` is capable of using multiple threads (See
   :ref:`Performance <performance>`) whereas
   :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` is always single-threaded and will
   ignore :member:`ReadOptions::use_threads`.
2. :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` performs type inference off the first

>    block that's read in, after which point the types are frozen. Either set :member:`ReadOptions::block_size` to a large enough value or use :member:`ConvertOptions::column_types` to set the desired data types

Reviewer: Can you try to limit line length here?

Author: Done.

      }
      std::shared_ptr<arrow::Table> table = *maybe_table;
   }

StreamingReader
---------------

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "arrow/csv/api.h"

   {
      // ...
      arrow::io::IOContext io_context = arrow::io::default_io_context();
      std::shared_ptr<arrow::io::InputStream> input = ...;

      auto read_options = arrow::csv::ReadOptions::Defaults();
      auto parse_options = arrow::csv::ParseOptions::Defaults();
      auto convert_options = arrow::csv::ConvertOptions::Defaults();

      // Instantiate StreamingReader from input stream and options
      auto maybe_reader =
        arrow::csv::StreamingReader::Make(io_context,
                                          input,
                                          read_options,
                                          parse_options,
                                          convert_options);
      if (!maybe_reader.ok()) {
        // Handle StreamingReader instantiation error...
      }
      std::shared_ptr<arrow::csv::StreamingReader> reader = *maybe_reader;

      // Set aside a RecordBatch pointer for re-use while streaming
      std::shared_ptr<RecordBatch> batch;

>       // Attempt to read the first RecordBatch
>       arrow::Status status = reader->ReadNext(&batch);
> 
>       if (!status.ok()) {
>         // Handle read error
>       }
> 
>       if (batch == NULL) {
>         // Handle end of file
>       }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      while (true) {
        // Attempt to read the first RecordBatch
        arrow::Status status = reader->ReadNext(&batch);

        if (!status.ok()) {
          // Handle read error
        }

        if (batch == NULL) {
          // Handle end of file
          break;
        }
        
        // Do something with the batch
      }
```

I know it is an example but I feel we should show actual streaming consumption.

Author: Agreed. Accepted your change in 32dcec6de04b10111ec78413589013bd6646c2a5.

   }

.. _cpp-csv-tradeoffs:

Tradeoffs
---------

The choice between using :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` or
:class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` will depend on your use case but two
caveats are worth pointing out:

1. :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` is capable of using multiple threads (See
   :ref:`Performance <cpp-csv-performance>`) whereas
   :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` is always single-threaded and will

>    ignore :member:`ReadOptions::use_threads`.

Reviewer 2: Close enough I suppose.  The streaming reader does use some threads and will (hopefully) use more in the future.  But I don't know that we can meaningfully explain that here without going too far into the details.

Author: I based my text here off of https://github.com/amoeba/arrow/blob/9640c3f7db50a1e95d397a8d9ec37ca33d10c733/cpp/src/arrow/csv/reader.h#L64-L71. Should we update that comment too or is this just nuance?

Would better language be something like:

> When reading the entire contents of a CSV, TableReader will tend to be more performant than StreamingReader because it makes better use of available cores.

Reviewer: @amoeba Yes, that sounds good to me.

Author: Thanks, changed to above in 0b04652b5f991e4480eac1be3c16274d48d6de94.

2. :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` performs type inference off the first
   block that's read in, after which point the types are frozen. Either set
   :member:`ReadOptions::block_size` to a large enough value or use
   :member:`ConvertOptions::column_types` to set the desired data types

>    explicitly.

Reviewer 2: Or else what?  It may not be clear to the user this would lead to an error like "XYZ is not a valid float32"

Author: Good point here. I'll update this language.

Author: Updated in https://github.com/apache/arrow/commit/3d54059caa2f6dc888be670f98da33d526a12ba4 and 039d23f8aa093017e72446d405a5f45b849d2689. I didn't include specific error text but said,

> after which point the types
   are frozen and any data in subsequent blocks that cannot be converted to
   those types will cause an error.

> 

Reviewer 2: These are all cons :)

The table reader requires loading all of the data into memory.  This is a pretty significant tradeoff we should point out here.

Author: > These are all cons :)

Can you elaborate on this? Do you just mean to say they aren't really tradeoffs?

> The table reader requires loading all of the data into memory. This is a pretty significant tradeoff we should point out here.

Yep. I wasn't sure if that was too obvious and removed it. I'll put it back in.

Reviewer: > Do you just mean to say they aren't really tradeoffs?

As written, then yes, there aren't any :-)

> Yep. I wasn't sure if that was too obvious and removed it. I'll put it back in.

-+

Author: I made some substantial changes to the tradeoffs section following the above feedback in 3d54059caa2f6dc888be670f98da33d526a12ba4. All three are now actual tradeoffs. I was struggling a bit with the language so feel free to rewrite.

        // Handle StreamingReader instantiation error...
      }
      std::shared_ptr<arrow::csv::StreamingReader> reader = *maybe_reader;

      // Set aside a RecordBatch pointer for re-use while streaming
      std::shared_ptr<RecordBatch> batch;

      while (true) {
          // Attempt to read the first RecordBatch
          arrow::Status status = reader->ReadNext(&batch);

          if (!status.ok()) {
            // Handle read error
          }

          if (batch == NULL) {
            // Handle end of file
            break;
          }

          // Do something with the batch
      }
   }

.. _cpp-csv-tradeoffs:

Tradeoffs
---------

The choice between using :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` or
:class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` will ultimately depend on the use case
but there are a few tradeoffs to be aware of:

1. **Memory usage:** :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` loads all of the data
   into memory at once and, depending on the amount of data, may require
   considerably more memory than :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` which
   only loads one :class:`~arrow::RecordBatch` at a time. This is likely to be
   the most significant tradeoff for users.

> 3. **Speed:** When reading the entire contents of a CSV,

Reviewer: Looks like the numbering is off :-)

   :class:`~arrow::csv::TableReader` will tend to be faster than
   :class:`~arrow::csv::StreamingReader` because it makes better use of

>    available cores.

Reviewer: Link to the `cpp-csv-performance` reference here somehow?

The format of written CSV files can be customized via :class:`~arrow::csv::WriteOptions`.
Currently few options are available; more will be added in future releases.

> .. _performance:

Reviewer: Same here.

Author: Done.
